@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This file is part of Guile-SSH Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2014 Artyom V. Poptsov
@c See the file guile-ssh.texi for copying conditions.

@node Auth
@section Auth

@cindex authentication

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} userauth-pubkey! session username publickey privatekey
Try to authenticate with a public key @var{publickey}.

@var{username} can be either string or @code{#f}, If @var{username} is
@code{#f} it's assumed that the @var{username} was set though
@code{option-set!}  call.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} userauth-autopubkey! session
Try to automatically authenticate with @code{none} method first and
then with public keys.  The procedure will try to get a cached private
key from a @acronym{SSH} agent and if it fails it will try to read a
key from a file.  If the key is encrypted the user will be asked for a
passphrase.

Return one of the following symbols:

@table @samp
@item success
Authentication success.
@item partial
You've been partially authenticated, you still have to use another
method.
@item denied
Authentication failed: use another method.
@item error
A serious error happened.
@end table

@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} userauth-password! session username password
Try to authenticate by password.
@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} userauth-none! session
Try to authenticate through the @code{none} method.

Return one of the following symbols: 

@table @samp
@item success
Authentication success.
@item partial
You've been partially authenticated, you still have to use another method.
@item again
In nonblocking mode, you've got to call this again later.
@item denied
Authentication failed: use another method.
@item error
A serious error happened.
@end table

@end deffn

@deffn {Scheme Procedure} userauth-get-list session
Get available authentication methods for a @var{session}.  Return list
of available methods.

This call will block, even in nonblocking mode, if run for the first
time before a (complete) call to @code{userauth-none!}.

Possible methods are: @code{password}, @code{public-key},
@code{host-based}, @code{interactive}.

@end deffn

@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "guile-ssh.texi"
@c End:
