@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This file is part of Guile-SSH Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2014 Artyom V. Poptsov
@c See the file guile-ssh.texi for copying conditions.

@node Examples
@chapter Examples

There are working examples that come with Guile-SSH.  These examples are
normally installed in @file{$prefix/share/libguile-ssh/examples} directory:

@table @samp
@item sssh.scm
@itemx ssshd.scm
Guile-SSH client and server example.
@item echo/client.scm
@itemx echo/server.scm
Echo client and server example.
@end table

In addition, the following sections will provide an overview of programming
with Guile-SSH.

@section Client

In this example we will connect to a server, open a channel and execute a
command.  Then we will read output from the command and close connection to
the server.

@lisp
(use-modules (ssh channel)
             (ssh session)
             (ssh auth)
             (ssh key))

(let ((session (make-session #:user          "bob"
                             #:host          "example.com"
                             #:port          22
                             #:log-verbosity 'nolog))) ; Be quiet
  ;; Connect to the server
  (connect! session)

  ;; Perform server authentication
  (case (authenticate-server session)
    ...) ; Check the result

  ;; Try to authenticate on the server with one of the `userauth-*'
  ;; procedures.  Let's use `userauth-agent!'.
  (case (userauth-agent! session)
    ...) ; Check the result

  ;; Suppose the authentication went successfully.
  ;; Now we need to open a channel.
  (let ((channel (make-channel session)))

    (if (not channel)
        ...) ; Handle an error

    ;; Open a session so we will be able to execute a command
    ;; on the server
    (catch 'guile-ssh-error
      (lambda () (channel-open-session channel))
      (lambda (key . args)
        ...)) ; Handle an error

    ;; Execute a command
    (channel-request-exec channel "uname")

    ;; Poll the channel for data
    (let poll ((ready? #f))
      (if ready?
        (begin
          ...) ; Read the output from the command
        (poll (char-ready? channel))))

    ;; Close the channel
    (close channel)

    ;; Disconnect from the server
    (disconnect! session)))
@end lisp

@section Server

In this example we will create a new server and start the server loop.

@lisp
(use-modules (ssh server)
             (ssh message)
             (ssh session)
             (ssh channel)
             (ssh key)
             (ssh auth))

(let ((server (make-server #:bindport      22
                           #:rsakey        "/home/alice/.ssh/host_rsa_key"
                           #:dsakey        "/home/alice/.ssh/host_dsa_key"
                           #:log-verbosity 'nolog))) ; Be quiet

  ;; Start listen to incoming connections.
  (server-listen server)

  ;; Start the main loop of the server
  (while #t

    ;; Accept new connections from clients.  Every connection is
    ;; handled in its own SSH session.
    (let ((session (catch 'guile-ssh-error
                     (lambda () (server-accept server))
                     (lambda (key . args)
                       ;; Handle an error
                       #f))))

      (if (not session)
        (begin
          (sleep 1)
          (continue)))

      ;; Handle server authentication request from a client
      (server-handle-key-exchange session)

      ;; Start the session loop.  Handle incoming messages from
      ;; the client
      (let session-loop ((msg (server-message-get session)))

        (if (not msg)
          ...) ; Handle an error

        ;; Get type of the received message
        (let ((msg-type (message-get-type msg)))

          ;; Handle the message according to the type.  Type is a list of
          ;; symbols where the car is the type and cadr is subtype.
          (case (car msg-type)

            ((request-service)
              ...) ; Handle service request

            ((request-auth)
              ...) ; Handle authentication request

            ((request-channel-open)
              ...) ; Handle request

            ((request-channel)
              ...))) ; Handle request

        (if (connected? session)
            (session-loop (server-message-get session))))

      (disconnect! session))))
@end lisp

@c Local Variables:
@c TeX-master: "guile-ssh.texi"
@c End:
